good evening my name is Alice Knapp I'm
the CEO of the Ferguson Library and I'm
going to talk very briefly but while I
do that gives you an opportunity to
silence your phones
mainly I'm here to talk about the
wonderful group the friends of the
Ferguson Library and so if this is your
first time at an author event you are
now members at least until the end of
December and I believe you're going to
be tempted as to why you should stay and
remain members but I will tell you what
the friends do for us they are the
secret sauce that raises money at fund
event fundraising events like this that
then goes back into the library to
underwrite some of our special programs
but on top of that they have some
special programs that they run one of
them is our books for babies program
which means that every child born in
Stanford gets a book
which deserves an Applause by the way
that has been true since the
mid 80s and it actually became a model
program for the whole country with um
the American Library Association so this
is something that other communities have
copied the other thing that they do is
they have a literary competition
um which is fourth grades three through
12 and many of the people who have gone
through it over the years have now gone
on to become writers in their
professional lives so it says it's a
great program if you're ever here on the
last Sunday in in April the first Sunday
in May please stop by it's Mayhem
because the families the winners come
with their whole families and their
grandparents and everything and you
would think they were graduating from
college it's just a fantastic program
but I you know what I will say is that
the friends make us a great Library as
opposed to just a good library and we
couldn't do what we do without them so
with that I'm going to introduce you to
Denise Marcel who's not only involved
with the author series that you were
seeing but is involved with a special
group that the friends committee that
the friends put together this past
spring to help the library as we combat
book challenges and this is a national
wide problem there's currently 38 book
challenges in the state of Connecticut
so we're not immune so they're helping
us as we fight against this and for
intellectual freedom and we are the only
book Sanctuary library in Connecticut
nope
thank you thank you Alice um I don't
know if everyone heard the last Point
she made was that
Ferguson Library is the only Sanctuary
library in all of Connecticut and it was
the second in the it was the second in
the nation
well we're here tonight I'm on the
authors series Committee of the friends
and we're here to tonight to uh this
evening to have a discussion listen to a
discussion with Dr Siddhartha Mukherjee
and he will be in discussion with Dr
Siobhan Dolan who is the chair of OB GYN
at Stanford health
and they will be discussing uh Dr
mahertz mukherjee's soul of the cell
but before I get started with some
introductions I would like like to tell
you about the other author series that
we have coming up this fall because we
have amazing lineup
on October 5th we have Jacques Pepin who
was here in December and filled filled
the house and Charmed everyone
on October 12th we have Nelson and Alex
DeMille Mega best-selling authors
and on December 4th we have Lydia
Bastianich the
restaurateur and and Chef and cookbook
authors
and the friends one of the other
programs the Friends host is a very
popular pub crawl which will be at the
end of October
where you've got to go to two different
restaurants and then come back to the to
the library for dessert and
entertainment
so for this evening
uh uh Dr maharji well they're going to
discuss his book and tonight all of you
of course received the book but tonight
is everyone in this audience it is your
lucky night because Elm Street books has
brought extra books and extra hardcovers
and they are selling those books
hardcover books for the price of the
paperback so that is a great deal
consider buying one as a gift and it's a
great hostess gift I always bring books
because everybody brings a glass a
bottle of wine but it's bring a book
instead
is the author of several books including
the Gene and intimate history which was
a number one New York Times bestseller
the Emperor of all malady's biography of
cancer which won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize
for General nonfiction
and the laws of medicine he is also the
editor of best science writing of 2013.
he is an associate professor of medicine
at Columbia University and cancer
physician and researcher a Rhodes
Scholar he graduated from Stanford
University university of Oxford and
Harvard Medical School
he has published articles in many
journals including nature the New
England Journal of Medicine cell the New
York Times magazine and The New Yorker
and for all his wonderful contributions
to science he was awarded the 2014
Padma Shear SRI award which is one of
India's highest civilian honors he lives
in New York with his wife and daughters
Dr Siobhan Dolan
in addition to her her MD degrees hold
holds an mph and MBA and an MS
and she is the chair of the Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Stanford
health
she's board certified in both Obstetrics
and Gynecology and clinical genetics
she received her medical degree also
from Harvard Medical School and she
completed her OB GYN
at New York Hospital
Cornell Medical Center and Yale New
Haven Hospital and she did her
Fellowship in clinical genetics at
Albert Einstein College of Medicine and
Montefiore Medical Center
Dr Dolan is building right here in our
community and in a very Innovative
clinical programs by integrating
genetics and genomics into aspects of
care to provide personal medicine for
all patients
please welcome our guests
we good thank you so much for that
lovely introduction and it is really
terrific to be here I thank everybody
for welcoming me to the Stanford
Community back in April when I joined
this community and Stanford hospital and
I'd like to welcome Dr Mukherjee tonight
to meet with all of us thank you very
much
so I thought we'd start at the beginning
tell us about the title what is the song
of the cell
so um thank you very much
um the title
um titles of books usually for me come
very late in the book I started with a
kind of a dummy title
um and so for a long time what was the
dummy title well there are many okay
I knew I had wanted the word selling and
I somehow couldn't put it in so
um initially it was called the sum of
all the parts
um which is a lovely line from a wall of
Steven's poem and it actually is one of
the chapter titles of the chapters and
then
um I was writing the book and
um there's a final chapter in the book
which talks about
um people who read the book or will read
the book the final chapter in the book
that talks about the idea of
um the inter communication between cells
and how you build a body human body or
animal bodies out of cells
and how you know a very old idea but
very
intriguing idea in medicine is that the
body is a citizenship of cells and so
somewhere along that there's a kind of a
beautiful
story
um of a man who of another writer amitab
Ghosh who's a great writer
um who goes um who tells a story of a of
a great botanist who goes to a
rainforest
um and he's and he takes um this is in
somewhere in South America and he takes
uh someone from the local Village to the
rainforest with him and this young kid
the local
um knows the name of all these plants
and as you know in the rainforest there
are thousands of plants so
um
and the botanist is amazed because the
botanist of course has never seen these
plants before and he says
um
what you know I'm amazed at how
you know the names of all these plants
and shrubs and trees and
and the the young boy
um is looks kind of dejected and the
botany says what's your problem what's
the what's the problem and he says
the problem is that I know the the trees
and the plants but I don't know the
songs that pass between them
um
and um and it's in a it's in a beautiful
book
um
and so I wrote this and of course the
idea was that as we understand ourselves
as ecosystems of cells we can understand
cells individually we're still to
understand the songs that go between
them and I'll give you some examples of
what that might mean
um in the malignant world for instance
um we don't know for instance why
some cancers only like to grow in some
places and not others so why does breast
cancer minutes
metastatic like to go to the Bone but
not to the spleen
we don't know the answer this is 2023
we've been studying breast cancer as you
very well know for decades and yet we
don't understand that why does you know
endometrial cancer like to go to the
lungs but not to any other part of the
body preferentially we don't know and so
just like the um
the young boy there's still so much to
be learned about the body and about
these and I just gave you an example of
a malignant disease but of course you
can imagine examples in which you know
you don't understand how uh and the
immune system connects with another part
of the immune system
um that's another song
um that builds multicellular organisms
like us and I can go on and on and on
give you examples both from the word of
disease and the word and from the from
the word of normal physiology where we
would be confused because we just didn't
know and so I'd finished this chapter
um and my publisher called me up and
said you know you've just gotten the
title of your book
and I said oh What's the title of my
books and she says it's the song of the
cell and I said oh
finally I've solved my problem because I
wanted the word I wanted the word word
cell in my title and so and it works
anyway that's how the panel is you know
I I when I um saw an interview you gave
and one thing you said which I wonder if
you comment on a little bit for me as a
geneticist this idea that like we had
sequenced the genome right we were done
we had we had the code but the idea was
right that the code in and of itself
really didn't tell the story The Cell
needed to process that needed to decide
how to become which cell and you know to
be diseased or not diseased and that
that was sort of like a score of an
orchestra and then the orchestra had to
play it so do you have thoughts about
that in a grande yeah I mean I think I
think people often feel as if you know
the genome is is is static
um so if I took any one Genome of any
one person it would be written in two
billion letters three billion letters
pardon me and
um if you published it like a book it
would be
um around 60 volumes 60 full sets of the
Encyclopedia Britannica so you can
imagine a single person's genome sort of
lining the entire uh this entire floor
of the library
um
but
um what's interesting about it of course
is that
your a nerve cell only selects certain
parts certain pages
um from that library of your genome
and
if you were to use a musical analogy
plays those out
um a cell in your liver uses a
completely different set and that's why
that is why it's a nerve cell and that's
why it's a liver cell it is the fact
that they're using the same each both of
them basically give or take have the
same library but because they're only
reading certain parts of it you can
completely change by reading only
certain parts of the encyclopedia can
completely change your identity and
that's why a liver cell is a liver cell
your brain cell is a brain cell and your
nerve cell is a nerve cell and so forth
so
um so there again this old metaphor of
the song because each one is playing a
different there's a master score
which all of us have in every cell
um but of course the individual parts
are individually different and I think
that's the basis for human physiology
that's how we behave and that's how we
that's how we become Who We Are
thanks
um so I'll tell you a little bit about
my journey I think when I was asked to
do this I started to read your book and
um sort of mid-august and I actually
listened to books on tape that's how I I
read it the first time which was
fantastic and when I finished the book I
was
I remembered
um The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks
and I actually went back and read that
again and the part that I remembered and
that I had read again in the second time
was this scene very much towards the end
of the book when the Hopkins researcher
who is actually visualized a lot of
cells brings
um henrietta's daughter Deborah and uh I
think the brother Zachariah and is going
to show the family these Hela cells
right so Henrietta Lacks had a cervical
cancer it was the basis of cell culture
you know was a you know a cell line that
really led to remarkable discoveries and
so this family under sort of lives this
whole experience sadly the mom passes
away Henrietta herself at age 51 and the
cell lines called Gila for H.E Henrietta
and then La Lacks so anyway the the
story is that Henrietta and her excuse
me Deborah and her brother are actually
now finally visualizing Hela cells after
their whole life hearing about these
cells
and um
they're they're looking at the cells
instead of having this remarkable moment
and I actually took the quote Deborah
finally looks down the microscope and
she says everybody's always talking
about cells and DNA but I don't
understand what is DNA and what's her
cells
and so the question I pose is how can we
sort of educate patients and consumers
in the public enough about cell biology
and what about it so that they can
actually actively participate and
benefit from all these amazing advances
in cell therapy
so I think the the the the way we
educate them is again through uh books
and uh and teaching them about the idea
of cell biology cell biology
um is extraordinarily Central to to all
of this um people have attached a kind
of
um importantly attached to kind of
um meaning to genes and genetics
um because of course it's very tangible
um it's something you inherit you
something you inherit from your from
your parents and and there's a tangible
sense that information is being passed
down cell biology is a peculiar
situation because that information
that's passed down becomes very diffuse
as I said before a liver cell and a
brain cell are not like each other so to
explain cell biology you have to really
take a different kind of approach you
have to use these kinds of ideas that
you know there's a song that's being
played out but it's different from every
cell even though the genetics or the
genes are are the same
um and then you begin to understand that
we are these very complex
assemblages or ecosystems depending on
how you want to put together you know
we're put together by that
um
and then usually I describe the idea
that the gene is inert without the cell
a gene is a molecule is encoded in a
molecule the molecule of DNA if you
float a strand of DNA in space it's
nothing but a molecule it's a chemical
a cell enlivens that Gene without a cell
you wouldn't have anything that Gene
would not have life so the cell is the
unit of life it's not the gene the gene
is just the information that's carried
as the unit of life so and it's it's
harder to explain because it's again so
diffuse a bacterial cell looks nothing
like for the most part looks nothing
like a neuron but they have many similar
properties
um and the final piece that I think
people get excited about
um and a lot of it is about getting them
getting people excited about the idea
um is that you know everyone talks about
the incredible and you know it's been
everywhere in the news these days
everyone talks about the digital
Revolution and Ai and other aspects of
the digital Revolution and of course you
know we've done a lot of work ourselves
in our laboratory on
um Ai and
um and uh machine learning etc etc but
it's the digital learning or digital
Revolution by itself is also inert it
has if for it to be actualized it has to
go through some living body
um
in other words for it to be actualized
it has to change Behavior it has to
change ecology it has to change
something about living beings
and in order to do that it has to
intersect with cell biology uh with
cells
um and it can be at the highest level it
could be you know your brain cells
interacting with something
um it could be actually the changes that
we make in cells it could be in the
birth of new medicines new drugs
um but ultimately you know all of this
this entire idea that that that that
that
virtually anything we do any activity
that we perform
is ultimately has to go through the
biology of cells if you twitch a muscle
it's a cellular activity if you
um heal a wound it's a cellular activity
most importantly if you birth a child
that's a cellular activity and so
um you know
um there was a nice review of my book in
The New York Times which says
well what wait a second what is this
book not about
um you know once you start thinking
about that I mean this book becomes
about everything so
um you know this maybe it should be
called the history of everything but
um but but in some ways you know not to
make to put a fine point on it it is
about everything because that's the way
we're built that's the way our the
structure of ourselves is created so
um long answer to your question I mean I
think a cell is the unit of life and
life through life
everything is actualized through life
um information uh activity response
stimulation stimulus all goes through
life and so
um it is simultaneously the most
exciting but also the most challenging
idea in science that that is where life
sits
yeah for sure I mean I'm sure you feel
this every day as well but it sometimes
it feels like we're speaking a different
language when you're talking to patients
in terms of like how to get people to be
able to meet you halfway to engage as
you point out in something that you know
is uh incredible to their you know
personal health and well-being and you
know we want our whole public to be able
to engage so you know there's time ahead
and certainly A Book Like This brings a
lot of folks around or on board and
really has been a profound education I
remember thinking I used to sit in
library for hours studying this and now
it's condensed into like two paragraphs
like I wish I had had this book when I
was in med school and you know like
mitochondria I can remember really
struggling over mitochondrial disease
and like there it is in two paragraphs
so congratulations and thanks for what
you're doing to educate the public
um I'll I'll move on if I may take my OB
G1 OB GYN prerogative um and the next
question
um you write about blood transfusion as
being um
such a you know a Monumental
breakthrough and you know what a
life-saving um aspect blood transfusion
was in the war and then it makes it
segues for me into maternal mortality
and you know Hemorrhage is a major cause
of maternal mortality and that the good
news is we've made some progress there
in this country we have you know massive
Hemorrhage protocols we have Hemorrhage
cards we're doing some good there we're
bringing down those numbers a little bit
but the maternal mortality crisis is
really staggering and in other ways we
see Rising rates of maternal mortality
and morbidity and we also see enormous
um racial disparities we see
African-American women black women with
three times the rate of maternal
mortality to white women in this country
and I know comparably there's a lot of
similarly inequitable outcomes in cancer
so I wanted to just pose this question
like how are we as a society how is our
health system going to Grapple with this
and really find a way to bring new
technologies and Innovation to benefit
all
um yeah what's interesting is
um you know there's every chapter I mean
this the way the book is organized is
sort of interesting let me talk about
the book for a second I'll come to your
question but um the way the book is
organized is that it's very different
from my other books
um because of the the the structure now
I'll talk a little bit about writing
this book which is which was a very very
different process
um usually when you write a book
chronology is your friend and you
um and I'm now talk talking about
writing non-fiction or fiction for that
matter you start the story at the
beginning and you end the story at the
end and there's the middle which is and
is you know carried through by time
um this book refused to be carried by
time
um which is very hard
um so instead of being carried by time
it's carried really by uh subject matter
and so each chapter becomes takes on the
Persona of a cell it becomes the life of
a cell and it's a very unusual in
structure
um and I sort of
sort of randomly came about that idea
not randomly I spent a lot of time on it
but
um but yeah evolved yes um all right so
um the reason I'm giving you that as a
background is that
um I think that
um the
um the idea of
um of how to solve racial disparities
and particularly racial disparities in
outcome in medicine has finally come
home to really
um bother people enough
um that we are trying to set about
protocols to address them
um there are many examples of this you
know
famous famous story is that you know
um an African-American man uh and a
white man walk into the same Hospital
through two doors both have the same
prostate cancer the um and this is the
true fact the African-American man has
lives for five years uh the the white
man lives for 25.
um and that's not always some of it has
to do with genetics and exposure but um
some of it has to do absolutely with the
quality of care and the differences in
the quality of care and it's the same
thing with maternal mortality same thing
with infant mortality Etc
um I think I mean the first thing that
one does in medicine is to establish the
facts
um and thankfully we have ways that we
can establish those facts and those
facts are not disputable you can't have
false information about facts although
certainly you can in the public sphere
but
um in medicine it's very hard to have
false information about facts and these
are facts
um these are truths and so once you have
the truths you then have the capacity to
act on them and
the nice thing about it is that it's a
self-fulfilling cycle because you then
have the capacity to figure out whether
the outcomes are matching what you
expect them to match so if one is true
to all of this
um then you know the general progress of
medicine is to go through this virtual
cycle in which you identify the facts
you identify the problem you create the
facts around the problem and then you
ask the question what's the cause
um the cause could be you know
misinformation the cause could be
absence of adequate care a cause could
be economics could be all of those and
then you take them system by system and
try to figure out ways that in
healthcare at least you have a more
equitable distribution of resources and
therefore
correct some of these this is The
Virtuous cycle the interruption of that
virtual cycle is misinformation lack of
information
um you know rumors gossip all the kinds
of things that disrupt that virtuous
cycle which we are all very familiar
with
thank you
um next question I want to ask you to
think with us about
um Stanford we have an amazing group of
friends here we have an amazing hospital
when I joined here I actually met with
Kathy salardar as our Hospital president
who's fantastic and she talked to me
about Innovation like what can we do
right here that's Innovative and so
we're working on developing a
personalized medicine center and it sort
of logically comes out of OB GYN in that
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer and
genetic testing for brca1 and 2 and then
taking steps to bring down your risk if
you've found to be carryover mutation is
one of those areas that's really ready
for Prime Time clinically and I think
that's where we want to start and we're
starting there but that's not what we
where we want to end so from your
perspective like what's ready for prime
time in a community what's ready for
population level personalized medicine
and you know what can we do here to to
sort of generate that excitement and be
forerunners in bringing this revolution
to improve health
well you know with the the big Advantage
with with uh in communities uh um when
you look at it in terms of population
health is that you have probably the
best follow-up
um and the most continuous way of
treating patients
um so unlike tertiary Hospital Systems
where often patients are essentially
lost they come in for one visit and they
they go away communities are networks of
friends
um and those networks of friends can be
very powerful because they allow
continuity and you can follow someone
not for one day or two days but for
weeks and for months and for years
um and so the power
um is not to be underestimated because
you can launch uh longitudinal studies
which are impossible to La would which
would be impossible to launch otherwise
so I you know obviously the the real uh
advantage of having a community is that
everyone's trapped in a room like this I
mean you can't there's only one door out
and you can't get out
um uh no I mean that in a very positive
sense
um and there's a reason that you know
great
population studies that have allowed us
to personalize medicine some of which we
actually have forgotten about but great
population based studies that have
allowed us to personalize medicines for
Community studies so think about the
Framingham study the Framingham study is
completely changed the way we manage
cardiovascular health what has come out
of the what came out of the Framingham
study well number one we realized that
hypertension was an independent risk
factor for heart disease incredibly
important so-called silent killer you
and I wouldn't be measuring our blood
pressures if it wasn't for that it's
actually hard to think there was a day
when we didn't know that if you know
what I mean you know it was such a bad
fact at this point yeah but the reason
that study was possible was because it's
not it's not called the Boston study and
it's not called the San Francisco study
it's called the Framingham study because
Framingham is a small relatively small
local community where they had longitude
attitudinal follow-up for years and
years and years and years and they
figured out in that study how to look at
risk of cardiovascular disease and so
again I mean I think at a place like
Stanford you played your strengths the
the strengths that you have is you have
law you have you have a network of
friends uh and families right from a
genetic standpoint right because and so
and so incredibly important because you
have a resource that no one else has
because you can follow some a family or
a network across multiple Generations
multiple uh time points and you can
generate incredibly important
personalized data and I often say that
personalized medicine begins with
genetics but it doesn't end with
genetics so you might find for instance
some you know it could be behavioral
um it could be it could end up being so
you know and there's an incredibly
beautiful study by
um uh professors initially in from
Boston and now at Yale who have studied
for instance
um happiness
um or um and they studied that by
studying a cohort in a community setting
and asking the question who is happy and
who's not happy
um it sounds like an like a rather uh
silly question but it turns out the data
are very interesting
um and I think it's the most popular
course at Yale is that right yes it is
and it says she's on to something right
yes I know it's based actually that
course is is uh largely not completely
but largely based on that kind of study
um what that study showed is very
interesting what that study showed is
that if you follow if you create a
network
of humans which you can in a community
so if you for instance if you map and
you can map this room
um as a network forget about it in any
individual so look to your left look to
your right and look up and down and
you'll see that you'll know someone here
so you can create basically a virtual
map of
um of this community of people who are
here by one degree two degrees three
degrees four degrees of separation okay
so your neighbor may be here that's one
degree your your friend maybe here
that's one degree your friend of a
friend maybe here that's two degrees and
so forth so you can create a map and
then you ask the question and this was
the question that was asked
um who's happy and who's not happy and
how does that change over time
and what's interesting is that it turns
out that it's a little bit like
electrical circuits if you look at this
over time
um happiness is created in networks and
nodes so there's a network of happiness
and an individual usually inhabits that
Network
and what happens over time is that when
a network starts dimming
the entire network dims together and
over time what happens is that people
who get sad or depressed or isolated sit
in the peripheries of this network
they're individuals they're alone
they're outside these networks similar
work has been done on Obesity similar
head work has been done now on access to
care
and so when you talk about personalized
medicine and the power of the community
you have to remember the power of the
community is to enable these kinds of
incredible longitudinal studies which
would otherwise be impossible in the
absence of a community of people
that's great so let's go Stanford right
we have a lot of great work to do
um and and I'm actually not joking about
that because I think the other powerful
piece is
to do Cascade testing so say you
identify an individual with a Cancer and
they do genetic testing and they find
that they have you know like what was
formally called a mutation but now we
call a pathogenic variant but the idea
is it's a genetic change associated with
increased risk of disease but if you
identify that in a family the hope then
is and not the hope the reality is you
can test sisters children parents Etc
and identify individuals at risk before
they develop the cancer so I think the
real
preventive step is there and again I'm
looking forward to implementing that
here in Stanford with with everyone here
and again thanks for giving us some
forward-thinking ideas
um I'm going to ask one more question
then we're going to do like a little fun
you know fast thinking kind of question
and then I'm going to open up to the
audience fair enough
for fun okay
um
I have read books like my whole life
where they're often fiction and the kind
of conceptualization is like it's
absolutely predictive like it's in his
DNA you know like he's
he's this or he's that and I was reading
this weekend it's like a Jenna's book
club book it's called it's great it's
called bunion Moon by Tao Thai and sure
enough I'm thinking I'm getting ready
for this interview excuse me and here it
is and it's in many many books but our
good Mothers born that way is the DNA
strand an invisible one winding through
the others this notion which I often
read in fiction I'm curious of you as
well but that it's like a genetic change
and it's fully predictive
and those of us in genetics in the
genetics world and in cell biology now
it's not at all fully predictive it's
quite probabilistic and how you make
your way through the cell as a genetic
code is a big part of how your
probability gets determined so I'm
always like it always crosses my mind
like how did this idea get out into the
public and then the reality is quite
different and like what should we do
about that I'm just curious if you have
any thoughts
well so I mean you know my broad
thoughts are
um I mean aside from extraordinary uh
rare diseases
um cystic fibrosis maybe Huntington's
almost certainly
um virtually most common diseases
um and most common traits
are encoded by dozens of genes or
Modified by dozens of genes even the one
you mentioned bracha one remember that
most of the studies that we've looked at
have looked at bracca one
retrospectively in other words you have
cancer do you have bracawan
um there if you look at the other way
which is you have Brach one do you have
cancer it turns out that not everyone
with bracha 1 gets cancer
um and it not and some people some
people may get cancer in 90 years old
some people may die with cancer cells in
their body but never have an overt
tumors so
um and this again brings me back to the
idea of the community what the community
allows us to do is to look not in the
rear view mirror but in the forward view
mirror and when you look in the forward
view mirror which is when you start with
the genetics and ask the question what
happens to the person over time you
realize several things number one is
that you realize that we underestimate
Gene Gene and Gene environment
interactions and that's because
the whole idea of genetics is filtered
through the cell cell biology and and
the cell is what's being subjected to
the environment yeah the gene is not
right it's your cells that are
encountering whatever the environment
that they're in
um and so um there's a big missing chunk
there of information filtering
um and we've missed we're missing that
so again Gene Gene and interactions
that's genetic but Gene environment
interactions are extraordinarily
important so a person who may have a
predisposition to heart disease or to a
disease of the nervous system you know
premature aging or Alzheimer's disease
may be completely altering that risk
based on what environment they're in
um I'll tell you an interesting fact
now that we're exploring and then we can
go to your quick fire round but now that
we're exploring a disease like
Alzheimer's disease everyone is of
course concerned about this because we
can see the prospect of
neurodegeneration in our future
um one thing is and there are a thousand
people who are trying a thousand drugs
for this there's one thing that's almost
certainly likely to work and it's always
worked and it has a physiological
relevance or a physical a cell
biological significance so it turns out
that
if you look at the brain and you forget
about the brain and you just think about
the brain as an arbor of neurons and by
Arbor I really mean like a tree so a
tree with a billion branches
interconnected with each other right
what happens in neurodegenerative
diseases like Alzheimer's disease is
that the arbor declines over time and
the brain gets the branches get less and
less connected it's like a tree where
the branches begin to die out the
central stem remains but the complexity
of the branches begins to die out and
over time as you look that the branches
die out now what's interesting is if you
look at patients
who may have a predisposition to
Alzheimer's disease
their branches tend to die out and again
this is early data so that it needs to
be refined their branches tend to die
out basically on the same curve
so you can't alter the the slope of the
curve you can't seem to alter and maybe
some of these new drugs will but what
you can change is where the starting
point is and if you change the starting
point if you start here and you you your
branches diode obviously there's a
threshold and all of a sudden you know
you'll be you know a patient sick with
Alzheimer's disease whereas if you start
here on the same curve you live out your
life you know you're on the same curve
but your your disease develops much
later and then the question becomes well
how do I change that curve how do I
change the sorry that's the starting
point
and the one thing the the single thing
that changes that starting point is
to remain engaged
um and to remain engaged as an El you
know as you age so exercise social
engagement
uh dialogue brain puzzles
um walking I mean all of these are
independent fat community
um dancing uh meeting people having a
meal together these are independent
predictive factors of how much uh you
can arborize your brain and thereby
prevent that decline that happens so
that it happens later in life so you
know of course that's what it would be a
wonderful thing if there were drugs
around and you know things would become
we've become very happy but
um but in the meantime while you wait
for the drugs you know get yourselves to
work right let's dance yeah
it reminds me of um bone density right
because we work so hard with women I
remember learning like oh bone is not
this firm fixed thing it's always you
know building and being broken down and
so this idea for we work with a lot of
women to try to get to a maximum bone
density the same starting point and then
you can do everyone declines from there
yes um okay so come to the library more
often read a book for sure do something
um so yeah so I was I was actually going
to make a segue but you made it too easy
for me your colleague uh Paul greengard
you talked about fast neurons and slow
neurons and so we've heard a lot about
your slow nerds or we've heard from your
salon orange so far I'm gonna do a
little quick this or that for the
audience we're just going to pose two
um two concepts and Dr mukuchi will
choose it's fun it's not like don't take
it too seriously I also my uh residents
helped me make up these questions you
know the heart and soul of a department
is there OB GYN in art OBGYN residency
we have 16 fabulous residents so thanks
to all the residents okay Ready set go
um
Barbie or Oppenheimer Oppenheimer
Bollywood or Hollywood uh Hollywood
Hollywood
um Harry and Megan are willing Kate uh
will and Kate Playstation or Xbox
Mac or PC
a Mac sorry this is a short answer what
was your first job
yeah
sorry I should have warned you sorry
about that sorry um I was a librarian in
uh I was yeah
um I was terrible at it
um luckily medicine worked out I know I
was a librarian or not I was in our
librarian I was in the library intern
um in the um library of maps at Stanford
fantastic wow this was a great question
then
baseball Cricket footballer soccer uh
soccer sneakers are trainers sneakers uh
Yankees are Red Sox Yankees and
careful do you have a car ride to the
station I hope because
um here's a good one this was from my
son actually
um Messi or Ronaldo uh Messi okay
um bring that one home um
pickleball or tennis tennis what is your
favorite breakfast uh actually don't eat
breakfast okay there you go that was a
short answer
um chess or checkers chess
sunrise or sunset sunset and Patchett or
Jonathan Franzen and president Oh yay I
love being Patchett oh that made my
night thank you
um don't tell Jonathan
no no it'll stay I know both of them
right what what's what happens in
Stanford stays in Stanford right folks
um what is the title of the last book
you read or what you're reading now I'm
reading G-Man okay okay uh which is an
incredible biography of J Edgar Hoover
highly recommend it it's 800 Pages you
can kill someone with it but yes
they're very good or you'll make lots of
neuronal synapses by reading it
um all right we're in the home stretch
osteobat osteoblasts or osteoclasts oh
cute question but uh osteoblast T cells
are B cells uh T cells I happen to study
them so yeah there you go DNA or RNA uh
RNA because it's more fun more and last
but not least genes or cells cells
great thanks so much
appreciate that now we're going to go to
the audience so we have
um microphones and we're going to ask
folks to try to speak in the microphone
we'll try to get to everybody but the
microphone helps with the um taping so
people can hear the question although
I'll also try to to uh repeat the
question so right here right here let's
begin
Dr and uh Dr I'm so thank thankful for
spending the evening with us and I will
be spending my entire nights reading
this new book of course as I have the
last three
um I want to profess my question by
verbatim stating one of the quotes from
your book The Gina intimate history that
says uh
freaks become dorms enormously become
extinct Monster by monster evolution
advanced and about nine years ago in
UCLA Steve network with journalists talk
with uh with Mr Dean Nelson if I'm
remembering that correctly you hadn't
mentioned how research has changed the
regulatory landscape for research has
changed in the last 50 years
I just wanted to ask do you hold that
same opinion that you held in that
interview nine years ago what has
changed or
maybe in a better way to say what would
you see like the change of the
regulatory landscape in this country to
advance science further
well so it's a a complicated question I
mean the the quick answer is I think the
regulatory landscape is always catching
up with the science
um it's always one step behind because
you don't know what's gonna what's going
to come around the corner um I think the
regulatory landscape has changed
um sometimes for the better so almost
always what happens is that the
regulatory landscape changes it
overshoots
um because of of various reasons
including optimism about something then
it has to correct itself
um and this happens over and over again
it's a little bit like Evolution
um and so um I think what happened what
we've seen in the last four to five
years is the regular landscape changing
I'm almost certain that it overshot
um it um it's overshot in a couple of
ways one of them is I think that for
instance I think a drug such as some of
you may have seen this but a drug such
as Oxycontin uh would not have had
complete regulatory
um you know went to I would say a
regulatory process that would not have
been uh really even amenable in the
1960s I talked in this book about
Francis Kelsey
um a very important person so you know
you have a in our
incredibly addictive potent narcotic
um which is being released into the
public without appropriate controls
would not have happened in the 1960s
um and that's because you know there was
an incredible degree of advocacy plus
pharmaceutical pressure
um uh that that occurred
um and we now know the consequences of
that it Unleashed a terrible epidemic
that we're still struggling to contain
so I think what what typically happens
is the regulatory landscape changes the
important thing is to learn from the
past is to learn what what
checks and balances to put into place so
that that doesn't happen again
um the there has been an appropriate uh
uh resistance to some of these drugs for
Alzheimer's disease that were just
passed through the FDA and I think it's
appropriate because they're
extraordinarily expensive and they have
carry risk and the and what's happened
as a result of that is that people are
now saying well let's try to figure out
who responds and who doesn't respond
let's try to personalize it and figure
out who these who the patients are who
actually do respond that is the
appropriate cycle of response which is
to say that you know when when drugs get
moved without I I would say without the
full regulatory scrutiny the appropriate
response is for you and me the public
and Physicians to say to the FDA that's
just not right we're seeing things that
don't seem right to us if that cycle had
been appropriately exercised for a drug
like Oxycontin we would not have this
epidemic that cycle broke
um and you know I recommend people watch
either films the two films that are out
about one documentary and one sort of
fictionalized documentary which goes
through how that cycle broke Physicians
and patients should have Patient
Advocates and the regulatory networks
should have provided a counterbalance
which they didn't and as a consequence
we have this horrible epidemic thank you
uh Dr gofrani
hi thank you both so much that was
wonderful and exciting to hear
um Dr mukhiji I love that you are
clearly a scientist because I think we
really enjoy facts but I equally
appreciate that you seem to have a very
spiritual side if I'm Discerning that
correctly so I'm curious if you have
thoughts on the idea of our
Consciousness as an entity separate from
our brain
very important question
um you know I think it's a little bit
above my pay grade
um because
um uh you know certainly I've thought
about it it's a thought that every
scientist comes to at some point of time
I think
um I think that they're I the the the
the quick answer to that question is
that I think that there are phenomena
that have to do with
um the way our brains our neurons are
networked together
um that create phenomena that wouldn't
be even possible to imagine with without
that Network
um and I would extend that idea to
communities as well I would say that in
communities we the and this was the the
original title of the book the sum is
always greater than
um the the sum is greater than the sum
of the parts
um you can't add together it's not a
plus there's a multiplicative or
synergistic effect that has that happens
when networks of either humans or
neurons get together
and begin to encode information or love
or
um or Community or Spirits together
um and I think that is probably one
basis of Consciousness there may be
others that that I'm unaware of that's
your next book right
right there yes no thank you thank you
hello get ready for a softball question
after those
uh uh 10 years ago or so um I was
astounded to learn about the microbiome
and all the effects it had on the body
and that's your softball question
yeah
it was just very exciting to me and I
love to hear what the teachers are
interested in learning so what do you
find uh most the is the most exciting
research going on now
so
um so um great question and
um you know I think the microbiome has
been
um very underexplored
um we are just learning even the tools
to understand it
um and I would say that that there's a
whole level of mystery there
um as you know where as some people have
put it we're just carriers for
um for suitcases for bacteria
um and so
um what what's inside us is uh you know
um dwarves Us in cellular terms by
factors of a thousand maybe ten thousand
maybe a million depending on the organ
that you look at and so
um the only thing is that we actually
don't know
um what's consequential or what's not
consequential
um and so some of it may be very
um in terms of you know what's happening
in our guts
um and our mouths Etc and some of it may
not be very consequential because you
know it just happened this happened to
be symbiotic commensal organisms that
are sitting with us so I think it's a
big unknown but we finally have the
tools to understand it and I think
that's where that's where the science is
going
great and I think we have time for one
more question and then I want to give a
chance for people to get their book
signed so in the back we know you don't
eat breakfast but I wondered what you do
on a daily basis to keep your cells
healthy
uh nice that's a good question
um well so um I don't it's not that I
don't eat breakfast by choice it's just
that I by the time I have to run out of
the house
um I don't have time and
um and over time I've evolved a
mechanism by which I can probably
um get to lunch without eating eating
breakfast if I had breakfast then I
skipped lunch
um so I try to have two meals a day um
so what do I do to keep healthy um I
think I think the the most important
thing in physical health ironically is
mental health
um so before you take care of your body
you need to care take care of your mind
if you don't take care of your mind
you'll never be able to take care of
your body so I think the first and most
important thing is and they're related
to each other but you can't get yourself
out of bed to for instance exercise if
you can't get out of bed in the first
place
um and so um the first thing is to to
create a space for for your four mental
health and then it becomes
self-fulfilling or a cycle
and the cycle is that your mental health
leads to better physical health better
physical health leads to better mental
health so the things I do is play tennis
that's why I chose tennis
[Music]
and I run
um and I have started I've started
walking
um so almost every day I'll take about a
mile walk walk about a mile I don't
consciously
um eat I don't consciously diet but I
what I do do consciously is to stretch
out my meals and I don't snack so those
are my my very
um very broad sweep ways in which I
maintain Health but obviously Mental
Health First
thank you very much great well thank you
so much I'd like to thank Dr Mukherjee
thank you
um
and thanks to all the friends for
joining us tonight I'm going to defer to
the library team but we're heading this
way over here for signing okay great
thank you